As we begin to feel the squeeze of the times,
meaning the movement toward large scale change,
many of us begin looking to the most basic needs
of life for solutions, such as family and community.
Richard Flyer has a jump up in that he has spent many years
working in the arena of creating conscious community.
His work has created templates with which other communities
can begin to build solid relationships from within,
relationships that will serve all during changing times.
Your journey began early.
You were in just your pubescent years really when
you had come from a Jewish family,
and you had a certain kind of a comfort in
the life around you, but things started changing for you
because you started having your own, as you say off camera,
religious experiences.
Would you tell us a little bit about what happened in
the earliest part of your life that started forming
what you were to become in terms of your real affinity
with creating community?
What were those first experiences?
You know, when I was really young it was in
Washington, D.C., and you know, I was 12.
And I didn't understand it at the time, it was much later,
maybe 10 or 15 years to understand or have a context for it,
and I didn't share it with anybody.
It was just when I was going to sleep at night
in between the waking and the sleep state,
I just got the feeling of light and energy,
and it was...
it was kind of nerve wracking at the time, it was scary.
It was really scary, and it happened to me every day.
And I didn't really tell anybody about it.
I didn't know what it was.
And it was like, it was like energy coming into my brain,
and it made me feel like I was actually literally gonna die.
Every night.
And it sounds terrible because maybe to a 12-year-old,
I can't imagine my son right now who's 13 going through
something like this, and I didn't know what it was.
So many years later I think things shifted that when I would
go to sleep in the dream state it'd be more peaceful.
It'd be like lying on a beach next to an ocean,
it was like 90 degrees, blue sky.
It was really beautiful, and I'd feel energy coming up
into my body, and it would be like glowing light
from under my heart surrounding my head.
And it was just a wonderful feeling.
It was almost like something was working through me,
and I don't know what it was,
and I still didn't share that with anybody.
And I'd say into the early '80's then
I just, I guess I became accustomed to this.
And I didn't still have any context.
I didn't have any understanding of any religious principles
or spiritual principles, I didn't know.
And then I met some folks and ended up,
while I was working on my master's degree in marine biology.
I was studying dolphin communication at Catalina Island.
Then I was living in San Diego then in the early '80's.
I ended up meeting a medicine woman in Mexico.
She was a combination Christian Aztec medicine woman.
Interesting.
And she lived in the mountains outside of Ticate,
northern Baja California.
And she got a calling when she was young in a church
in Guadalajara, really kind of like Mother Teresa.
She got a calling to serve the poorest of the poor
and heal them.
So I met her and decided to move down for a year.
I got rid of all, I don't know why I did this,
one of those things where you just...
I sold my belongings.
I just had, I guess I had my car, and I didn't speak
Spanish very well, but I was living in a tent for a year
on her land.
And she had a healing room where people came from
all over the region, a lot of indigenous people that
came for healing.
And people would bring like some food or something
to exchange, so it was no money transferred.
It was just people brought whatever in exchange for healing,
so I was learning with her, and it was just really amazing.
I didn't really learn anything like technical.
Like I didn't become a quote healer 'cause I guess
I wasn't looking at it that way.
It was more I was able to be in the presence of a woman
who's in many ways transcended her ego,
and to live a life of love and service, and really do it.
And that was your attraction to her.
And did she invite you to come and be with her
and help her, or how did this happen for you?
Well you know, it was really interesting.
I went down there one time for a Sunday visit
where we were sitting around,
and that was just a Sunday with her family.
She had a large family there.
And I went home that night, and I had a dream.
Actually it was a series of dreams, and in this first dream
she actually was in it.
And it was a really profound experience because we were
in a forest, and I was taking her to, I had some reason
to take her to some place.
And I was taking her on a forest path to a spring,
it was a natural spring that had light bubbling up
from within it, and there were like Native American ladies
that were kind of--
How beautiful.
just kind of an experience of joy, and I looked,
and Catalina was happy.
So I didn't know what that meant.
And then there was a series of other dreams
that indicated that I should take it seriously.
So I was in the middle of my, actually almost finished
with my master's program,.
So I came from a scientific world view,
and Catalina had a different world view.
And it was great because then I could really balance them
and developed kind of a holistic world view that didn't
throw one out and another
and just go with some new world view.
It was more of a balance.
So I for whatever reason I went down there,
and I spent three days in this cave on a mountain
that was next to her property.
And I don't know why I did that, but I just had water,
and I was just sitting there, and I was praying.
And then I came down, and that's when she was telling me
something that was kinda funny.
She was saying that there was like a cloud
over the mountain, so this is her world view.
You know, I come from a rational scientific background,
so it was really different.
And she said, well this was this cloud over the mountain.
I said, well what was it?
She said, I hadn't seen one like that for 35 years.
And she said, it was a big healing.
She was talking about me.
Yes.
And then she, you know, didn't exactly invite me,
but we just became friends.
And then it seemed like there was an opening,
and she enjoyed my company, so I just moved down there.
So you lived in a tent and facilitated,
you were her assistant you say.
Yeah, I was just learning--
An apprentice.
with her, yeah, and she just used healing with herbs,
and she would pray to do what would be called
spiritual healing, and she invoked more from the
Christian point of view the name of the father,
the son and the holy spirit.
So she emptied herself of her ego in this prayer
and asked God to help her to be a channel
to help the people that came to her.
And I just saw some amazing things that were
happening there, and I was just taking it all in.
So it was part of my own growth,
and that was in the mid '80's.
And after that Tibetan Buddhism, a retreat?
Well you know, then it was another opportunity.
I was looking for a place to live, and I was actually,
actually this was, in fact it was prior to that.
I'm getting the timeline out of sync,
but there was a residential retreat center with a
Tibetan Lama, so even though I was raised in the
Jewish tradition, I was raised Jewish, my family's Jewish
from Russia, I lived in this house.
And there was a Tibetan monk that taught traditional
Tibetan Buddhist meditation.
So that's where I learned to do meditation,
and that was part of that unfolding.
Is that where you recognized what that light was
that had been coming into your head during that
in between state as a youth?
Well you know, some people explained it to me,
and they used kind of an eastern religious term,
kundalini, I didn't know anything about it,
but names don't really mean much to me,
like labeling something.
I just realize that the purpose of these experiences
is to kind of like wake you up to look deeper.
So the experience in itself is not important.
In fact, having these experiences means that you've got
a lot of blockages inside, a lot of resistance.
So they kind of burst out.
It's kind of like cleaning.
It's kind of like I guess you could call it--
Roto rooter.
Cosmic roto rooter, there you go.
And you know, I started to read a little bit
more about it, but I wasn't too much into that.
I was just into understanding more of myself,
and after that experience with Catalina I was kind of,
didn't really know what I was gonna do,
but I moved back into a neighborhood.
It was a low income Hispanic neighborhood
in San Diego called Sherman Heights.
And that's really where the path
you're on today took seed.
Well, it's kind of interesting, yeah, you're right.
It started in there.
I learned about Dr. A. T. Ariyaratne,
who is the leader of the world's largest
spiritually based community movement called Sarvodaya.
And Sarvodaya now is in half or 15,000 of the villages
in Sri Lanka, involving millions of people,
and he's been doing this for 50 years,
50 year track record of linking spiritual awakening
with practical social and economic change.
And the way that they do it that was just really amazing
is that they don't involve the government.
They're building a new society by getting people to
work together at the grass roots to manifest a
spiritually based people's power.
See we have trouble with that here because our whole society
is embedded in a political, social, economic matrix,
so you can't get out of it, we're stuck in it.
Hard to fathom having them listen to
a spiritual guide or influence of any kind.
Well, it's so overpowering and overwhelming,
the consumer materialistic society for the development
of the desire and hunger for spiritual awareness
in the United States.
But in these villages they didn't have any infrastructure.
They didn't have like you know places to irrigate.
They didn't have like farming, small businesses, preschools.
So in that context Dr. Ari learned that you could like
traditional spiritual practices, and in their society
it's Buddhist principles of meditation and compassion
and loving kindness, and link that to practical efforts
to build the community.
So in a sense they're building like a parallel
alternative society, and they incorporate as a
Sarvodaa society, and eventually the village becomes
self-reliant economically and starts helping and trading
with other villages.
How successful has this been?
Well it's really, it's pretty mind boggling in that they,
for example they've built 5,000 preschools
in 5,000 villages.
They've developed almost 5,000 village banks.
Amazing.
It's phenomenal, it's phenomenal.
And Dr. Ari's been going around the world for the last
couple decades, and I met him in the '90's in San Diego,
and we became friends, kind of like a mentor.
So I got influenced by that idea of linking spiritual
and community action, outside of,
in a non-political context.
See we normally think of spiritual activism
in a political context.
So for example, we might be pro-abortion or anti-abortion,
or pro-capital punishment or against capital punishment.
So we think of our spiritual activism as lobbying
the existing institutions,
the power structure that we have in our society,
rather than trying to build a new society from scratch
at the grass roots, which is what they're doing.
They don't ask the government for help.
They don't believe in welfare.
They're actually getting people together to take care of
their own needs.
Beautiful.
And they start with the poorest of the poor.
So if they can do that, I figured I learned, gosh,
you know that's something to really look at.
So Dr. Ari is actually considered the Gandhi of Sri Lanka
because he has merged some of Gandhian ideas of
non-violence and cooperation and peace with
traditional Buddhist ideas of loving kindness
and compassion.
So he's merged that together.
So Mahatma Gandhi in his constructive program
also called it Sarvodaya.
Dr. Ari retranslated it, created a new context for it.
Gandhi called it,
it had to do with revitalizing the villages there,
so Gandhi created a term that's stuck with me ever since,
which was building a commonwealth of village republics.
Beautiful.
So the idea is that after a century or more of British
colonial rule the villagers had lost a lot of self respect,
and they've lost economic and social power because
they were taking the resources back to Britain
to mass produce it.
For example, the raw materials to make textiles, clothing,
so they actually took the raw materials back,
whereas before the Indian people were self reliant
in these villages.
It was already a commonwealth of village republics.
So as a result of the empire, the British empire,
they became very dependent.
So that stuck with me because when Gandhi,
as part of his program was to build up this capacity
for self reliance within each village,
and build a commonwealth of them, so an alternative society
that's in parallel to that existing one.
And then Dr. Ari actually is doing that in Sri Lanka.
So I asked the question, well wow, if this is real,
and it's happening in Sri Lanka, how do we translate
some of these principles and ideas into the West?
Very good question, and it has a totally
different set of challenges because it does have
an infrastructure.
No, that's right.
Yeah.
We have an already existing infrastructure,
so you're not starting from scratch and building
new infrastructure, which on some level is easier,
because now we almost have too much infrastructure.
We have all these competing business associations,
social groups, religious groups, political belief systems.
We're kind of a mixture of all these competing interests.
So whereas they have to build infrastructure,
what I figured through my work in San Diego and then
in Torino now with the conscious community network is that
instead of having to build something new,
what we needed is a vehicle to connect those that are
already doing good to support them.
Yes, and let's go back to San Diego
and how you started.
You did some really interesting things there.
You know, thanks for bringing that up because
I guess I might have gone far afield.
(Regina laughs)
One example where I really learned this principle of
bringing and connecting the kind of disparate elements
of a given community together, so instead of creating
something new, like just another organization,
what we learned was that a group of people can become
a catalyst for total community change by bringing together
all the players and individuals in a community
who really care about the community.
So in this one neighborhood, it's called Logan Heights,
I was living on this street, I moved onto this street
as a community organizer.
And it was filled with violence every day.
On this one corner there were like 40 drug dealers.
It was like the crack and marijuana capital of
San Diego County.
It was a low income neighborhood.
The area was African American and Latino area,
so it was in a very low income.
Most of the businesses were owned by outside folks
that came in, mostly like liquor stores, convenience stores.
There weren't any supermarkets 'cause they
moved out in the '60's.
Most of the homes, like probably 85% of the homes,
were absentee owned, they were renters, people were renters,
so there wasn't a lot of ownership in the community.
So there wasn't like a sense of who's gonna take
responsibility for dealing with this drug trafficking
and violence right on the street.
The families just basically locked themselves
in their homes.
The police just drove by.
The government didn't do anything at the time
for all the code violations.
You know, there were houses there where
the roofs were leaking, there was mold in there,
and kids were getting sick, and I was seeing all this.
Basically I guessed it had reached such a point where
we were able to bring, through cooperating with the local
head start school, there was a school on this street,
and there was a great leader of that school who
we partnered with.
So we kinda brought together some nucleus of people,
and then we called a meeting.
And who were some of the other players,
besides the head start?
There was a professor at San Diego State University
who actually got a grant, you know, who was able to
get some support because he was really interested
in community development.
There was folks that were interested in local food,
and that's something that was developed later,
a food cooperative, and then a store,
and then a community center.
But we started with just the reality and facing
the reality of the violence.
Were there members of the community there--
Oh yes, yes.
represented there, too.
You know, we started to reach out to some of the churches,
some of the business leaders, but initially it was primarily
the grass roots folks.
Initially it was that because this is what we figured out.
Like moms and dads--
Yeah, moms, yeah, yeah, exactly.
it was just average people who really didn't wanna
lock themselves in their homes anymore.
Kids couldn't walk down the street.
So we had a meeting, and people were gathered,
and we did some simple things.
We started with just a gathering on the street where
people would do like a march for peace.
And it was really right in the middle of this kind of chaos
where people would, you know, it's kind of like
self assertion, people reestablishing a sense of dignity,
and you know, I don't wanna tolerate this in my community.
Anyway, so that led to other kinds of things like
cleaning up empty lots that had all sorts of refuse
and stuff in it.
And then that led to more meetings to discuss
practically what to do.
There were like 10 drug houses on this one street,
and the government wasn't very successful in
abating those houses.
It took the government years through legal process
to actually get the owner to be cooperative to not allow
that kind of behavior there.
The owners were not living there, and they just
collected their rent money.
So by mobilizing the community, by bringing together
all these different interests like the police department,
the building code enforcement people with the city
of San Diego, the churches, and there was a Catholic church
that was really involved, the leader of that church
got involved, and some of the business owners got involved,
we started to build a nucleus.
And then just symbolic acts.
For example, you know, a lot of the men on this
particular street really were,
they were kind of hanging out together,
but they were just maybe drinking beer on the side
of the road because it's kind of a, it was a miserable life.
I mean, all the drug dealing, and women and children
couldn't go out, but the men weren't really
being responsible.
They were just hanging out on the street,
so I actually got them together,
and I got some religious leaders, and we walked to
the corner where all these drug deals were happening.
So we just sat in the midst of them every night,
and we said we love you, but we don't love your behavior.
So we kind of established a connection with them,
that we weren't angry at them.
So that's kind of in a sense it's a non-violent aspect
of approach like Martin Luther King would use,
or that I learned from Mahatma Gandhi.
Actually Mahatma Gandhi learned that from studying
the Sermon on the Mount about non-resistance,
now you confront evil in this world, how you can overcome
our own anger and hostility to cultivate love
so we can go beyond our own desire for punishment,
so we can get right to the root of the problem.
So what we got the folks to do is say that we love them,
but that we're not gonna tolerate their behavior.
That's really an amazing--
Yes.
and powerful statement.
And I got the men active, so you know, to get involved,
and through time we got the different aspects of the city
that should have been involved, like the police,
to really be supportive,
so we worked in partnership with them.
So the networking principle that I learned is that
a small core group of people can bring together
all the players and people that are involved in
organizations as well throughout a community when nobody
may be taking responsibility because everybody's waiting
for someone else to do it, so nobody does anything.
Right.
We brought everybody together, and it created this synergy
and a nucleus, and later we called this community weaving,
so we're weaving the community together to solve
a common problem.
And we did it, I believe, from a perspective of
a higher principle of love.
That wasn't really clear at the time.
That took many years to understand, you know,
how to bring together, how people are brought together
with a common spiritual ideal.
That came later, but that was an experience of
network weaving and how to help people to take
responsibiliity and overcome inertia.
Yeah, what a wonderful example.
I mean, you went into the most hardcore situation,
but what a great place to cut your teeth because
then later you wanted to try, as time went on,
I know you've done a number of things through the years,
but let's stay on the theme of the conscious community
development, and now here we are many years later in Reno
where you started taking some of the principles that
you've learned through the years and applying them.
And this has been a very organic process for you.
You're still seeing how this whole thing
unfolds to this day.
So can you talk about what your intention was here in Reno,
and how you began the process of doing what you call
community weaving?
You know, we didn't understand it as weaving,
but I'll kinda back track, and then I'll fast forward it.
When we started it was five years ago.
We had again the inspiration from Sarvodaya and what
Martin Luther King was doing, and also Gandhi,
and then Gandhi's inspired by really the simple message
of love Jesus shared.
So all of that really kind of was percolating, you know.
So at the time I think I was not very comfortable sharing
my own spiritual...
I guess spirituality.
And so instead of getting to the core of it,
which I now understand is probably key,
which is in consciousness and really shifting our
own awareness and perception and try to develop a life
beyond just the ego focused.
At that time we had what we call pillars,
so it was the social, economic and the spiritual.
So we started with the economic 'cause I thought
at that time it would be the easiest 'cause then you don't
really have to get into maybe spirituality and discussion
of virtues and kind of figuring out that stuff.
Kind of the path of least resistance
in this culture.
I think so.
Yeah, I didn't know it at the time, but we built a network
of several hundred small businesses and community
organizations, so that was part of a larger effort
that's being called now community economic localization.
All around the world in probably hundreds if not thousands
of communities people are seeing the impact of globalization
and the fact that we're based on petroleum,
this economy is based on petroleum, and it takes a lot of
energy to move stuff and transport stuff.
And right now with what's happening with oil,
you see the bandwagon now.
Everybody's trying to figure out about local,
like local food, local economy, local energy,
and we were in a sense I guess maybe a little
ahead of the curve about five years ago.
And I guess many people looked at it, maybe it was kinda
funny or different, you know, 'cause we were
just starting out.
Now it's like everybody wants to do it.
Yes.
It's really amazing how you push the envelope.
So if you can get the courage up to follow your dream,
even in the face of maybe not a lot of support,
then it's amazing what can happen.
So that's what happened, we had these meetings,
we just started building an infrastructure for a movement
by having maybe, we had maybe 50 to 100 people
at a meeting every month.
And these are business community leaders,
but small businesses, like mom and pops,
the little guy, gal, the folks.
Not the casinos?
They didn't show up?
You know, actually we did.
I mean, some of them are local, locally owned,
so we did invite them, but some of the big guys
weren't interested initially.
Later on it developed like that.
That would be interesting.
When we get to that part I wanna know
how that turns out.
Well, it was seen, you know,
I guess it was maybe seen as kind of a liberal, left leaning
environmental kinda crowd kinda thing.
That's how maybe it was branded in the public's mind
what it was, and maybe it was some of that,
but we grew and expanded.
So in the beginning, so we started with these meetings,
and the meetings created a space for self organization.
That is we had sub groups.
We had small groups of people in the context of a
bigger meeting where people were actually flushing out
the form of the infrastructure that we needed to support
this kind of effort, to support the local economy.
And so that's how it developed.
So the principle there is something that people are
talking a lot more about now, which is called emergence.
So there's a collective intelligence that can happen
when you bring a group of people who are really different.
They come together, and if they focus on an issue
that's of concern to them, and they can learn to go
beyond their egoic reaction to maybe people are different,
you know, like you might have a Democrat and a Republican,
or you might have a Christian and a non-Christian,
or whatever, you have all this kind of mix.
If you can keep your eyes on the prize that we're trying
to overcome ourselves in the context of building community.
So we're not fighting against something.
We're trying to build something.
So we're looking for commonalities,
and collective intelligence happens where this
group mind develops, and out of that comes an
emergent process that you can't predict.
So it's kind of like, I don't know, I feel like it's
been that way all along, this whole process.
So it's never crystalized into some formal structure
that's bureaucratic or tries to become part of the system
or part of the power base that exists in this world.
This is what I've learned is that it's important to
keep being a catalyst, to keep this purity of intention
so that you're not like sucked in where you're trying to
get somebody elected, thinking that that's gonna--
Help your agenda.
Yeah, and it's kept pure.
It's pure what it is that we want.
What kind of community do we want?
What kind of life do we wanna live?
And we get the people together around that,
and it keeps deepening.
So that was the first stage, and the second stage
after about a year or two, kinda fast forwarding.
Just before I go on, we developed a lot of, you know,
I guess tools to help people become aware of the
local economy and the little guy and gal.
We developed a directory.
We didn't know anything about printing and publishing,
so we got a large group of people with different skills,
and we just put it all together.
So we weren't a publishing house, we were just
regular people, but we figured it out and produced
tens of thousands of copies of this directory,
and we had meetings.
We had an online directory where people can connect,
so that was the beginning.
That then led to focusing on another aspect of our
local community, which is the local food system.
There wasn't like a network of organizations that were
meeting regularly, so what we did was we'd used this
breakfast meeting that we had been going now
for two years, it started in '03, in 2003,
and we applied the same principle of emergence
and the fact of the conscious community being a catalyst,
and not trying to just reinvent the wheel.
We were just a catalyst, so I was able to identify
some of the people that we became friends with,
and we identified some key nodes, people that are
really connected in that industry, in the food system,
and we got 60 people at this breakfast meeting.
And it was people like the farmers, the ranchers,
the people that buy food for the school district,
so institutional buying, the restauranteurs,
people interested in local organic foods,
so the food activists, people that are concerned with
low income access to food, food security it's called.
So the food bank, the WIC program and these other,
so we brought everybody together.
And I remember when we got everybody together
this one leader of a community organization that
deals with food, she got up and she said something like,
you know, I've been wanting to do this for like eight years,
bring everybody together, I just didn't have the time.
So it got me thinking about how this self-organizing process
can be helped, how we can help the emergence of
real authentic community is that we gotta realize that
we have all these players that they're already doing good,
but they're just very busy, and people have
defined territories that we work in.
Whatever, it's a business, an organization, what have you.
And it just took a small group of people to invite
all these other folks that were themselves connected
together to just really enjoy each other's company,
so it was building trust.
It's very simple.
So then what happens was it turned out there was
a small farm conference two months later,
and this group of 50 became 100.
And then they had a person who's worked with
food systems from Morgan came down and helped
facilitate a group process, and that led to the
Local Food System Network in our region.
And what have the effects of that been?
Well, they've continued to meet themselves,
and the way that Local Food System Network relates to
the conscious community is that they're totally independent.
It's not like our project or anything.
See that's the first pitfall of trying to control
this emergent process, is to try to say oh that's
a project of me, that's the ego, see ego speaking.
So what we did was consciously let stuff go.
We just bring it together, and let it go, let it emerge.
So what emerged?
Well, they met once a month, and there was already
a food cooperative kind of developing,
so the Food System helped to strengthen that food coop
to get new membership, and it brought resources to it
so they can be strong financially, and build a structure.
So there's like people already doing that,
but they were then connected with people building
what's called the Great Basin Basket Program,
which is our area's community supported agriculture program.
And that was also assisted in this process of bringing
all the stakeholders in the area food.
It accelerated the growth of that CSA, moreso--
Talk about CSAs for just a moment,
for whoever doesn't know what this means.
Well, community supported agriculture is a way in which
local consumers in a given area are connected
directly to farmers, either through purchasing like a share
in the farm, or giving maybe a certain dollar amount
per week, and you get, in our case we get delivered
a box of fresh produce and other food items once a week
during the periods from June through October.
And then there's gonna be a fall CSA.
So we're actually now expanding almost to year round,
even in a climate that is just, we live in a desert here,
and it's really amazing.
So that program has several hundred families
that are involved--
Fabulous.
that community supported agriculture program.
And then there was years ago, as part of this kind of
consciousness raising around food,
there was some connections made regarding doing
a public farmers market downtown Reno.
And it's now called the West Street Market,
and that actually involves,
there's a lot of stakeholders in that.
But the seeds of that idea came just by connecting people
years ago in the city structure because the city of Reno
has invested some money into it,
as well as other stakeholders.
And our local environmental network has moved in
to the space there,
and they have continual consciousness raising.
Wonderful.
So the Local Food System group meets monthly,
and they're just really excited, so they're just building
that kind of network.
So we were just a catalyst, and let it go.
So we've kind of developed this idea of building blocks,
and local economy is one, local food is another.
Healthy families and communities, like family community
health and wellness.
So these are all, and then neighbors getting
to know neighbors.
So these are building blocks or basic needs
of every community.
In fact, this could be universal.
These are basic needs that are universal,
and some of those I learned from Sarvodaya.
They have 10 basic needs for a village,
and how a village could develop.
So some of these ideas that we use,
we call them building blocks, and we created a concept
that we call a community ark.
So an ark is kind of, I guess it may sound biblical,
and I guess it is in a sense that, you know,
back in the Bible about the fact that humans weren't
doing very well on the planet, and I guess God told Noah
that he better prepare for this big deluge that's going to
cleanse everything so we could start again.
Well, not to get so extreme, but what we're looking at is
with the breakdown of infrastructure, like the credit system
and the mortgage system and the petroleum-based
energy system--
Political.
Yes, it's forcing us back into our local communities.
In other words, we're kind of stripping away all this
global idea, which is good to develop global markets
and those kinds of things, but if it's not based on
a sound foundation, which we believe there's spiritual
aspects to it, social aspects and economic aspects,
and it has to do with local community self reliance
and self support, and a different vision than exists in
our whole overall global society now that's
very materialistic.
So this community ark idea has to do with building
an infrastructure so that we can take care of each other
and support one another.
So while right now with what's happening with the
global economy, specifically the American economy with
housing and the credit crunch and all these things,
is that people are actually seeing that it's important
to get to know your neighbor.
Yes, and talk about this, it's a monthly program?
Well you know, it started, you mean Get to
Know Your Neighbor?
Yeah.
It was an annual event that emerged,
this is another kind of emerging event,
one of the few annual events that we do.
This event started three years ago, and it was called
Get to Know Your Neighbor Day, and now it's called
Get to Know Your Neighbor Week, and it's in June.
And it simply started where we asked people to do
a gathering, like a potluck or a barbecue, in their home or
in their front yard or on their street, like a block party.
And the first year without any publicity we had like
50 simultaneous gatherings.
Wow.
So 50 people stood up and they said, you know,
I don't really know my neighbors very well.
Or I know them, but I wanna reconnect and
strengthen the bonds.
So they went door to door, each individual person,
and did these simultaneous gatherings with
thousands of people.
And then this last year it's probably up to 100 gatherings.
And what's unique this year I feel is that it's not just
an annual event.
Many people throughout our community actually are
doing this year round.
That is, they actually are forming what we call
caring circles.
So on a given street, the person who steps up
and does this potluck, they find a way to communicate
with their neighbors through email lists,
they get their phone numbers, they do skills sharing.
You know, what do you need?
What do I have?
And then people start taking care of basic needs.
You can think about it, of all the world's problems,
many of them exist on any given street in the world.
Hunger, alienation, poverty, homeless.
I mean, all these things exist on any given street.
So we kind of suggested to people, 'cause many people
that are activists tend to think globally or nationally,
but for whatever reason this year, in 2008, many people are
seeing the need, especially like environmentalists and
others that are concerned about ecological footprints
and that kind of thing, they're seeing the need to really
make this grass roots,
so they're actually organizing their streets.
Like they're planting gardens, they're growing food,
they're sharing skills with one another.
Seniors who were alone are identified just because people
get to know that, hey gosh, there's somebody that's
alone there, maybe they need some support.
So they actually connect a family to a senior who's alone,
or single moms who really didn't know each other,
they form a bond because they can help each other
with their children.
And I've actually, over the years I've done this myself,
as being a single dad raising a 13-year-old boy, you know,
a lot of my neighbors here get to know their friends,
and then we help each other.
So it's a natural process.
So what we're doing is, again we're a catalyst for an
emerging natural process that's been kind of overshadowed
by people focusing on the powers that be to
take care of our lives.
We're gonna wait til the government does something.
Or we're gonna wait til the social service agency
does something, or the business community,
or the corporations.
Well you know, right now the consciousness is shifting,
and people are realizing that we must take
care of ourselves.
Absolutely.
So that's what's happening, and it's real exciting
because it's going, and so now we're building leadership
amongst the folks that have stepped up on the streets,
and to support them so that they get together,
and that they continue this process of training others
to do the same.
So imagine, like in our town imagine hundreds of thousands
of streets where there are people who are coming from
a higher spiritual consciousness of love and
wanting to be of service.
Imagine them witnessing to that by their beingness,
their nature.
It's not flashy, it's not a teaching, it's not an agenda.
The agenda is just being open hearted and to be
of service and available.
So you're not trying to push anything except just
being available, being open.
And you have these meetings that I think
you told me were once a week.
Is it once a week or once a month,
the community weavers group?
Well, would you like me to share the origin
of that group briefly?
Yes, I would.
And share what you do, and that this is actually fulfilling
the spiritual element of the consciousness.
You know, that's true because we have these three pillars,
the social, economic and spiritual.
And we've been developing a social infrastructure
and an economic infrastructure in the beginning.
Then question is, in America where we have so many
different belief systems, religious and spiritual
belief systems, how is it possible to get people together?
Because historically it just seems to lead to conflict
and war and bloodshed, you know, arguing about
different belief systems.
Who's right, who's better?
So we decided, even though a lot of people were kind of
unsure about doing this, like how do we open,
how do we have a conversation about spirituality without it
generating a barroom brawl?
Yeah.
You know, how do you do that?
So we called a meeting in '06, and it was on Valentine's Day
so it was kinda cool--
Wonderful.
because it gave us an excuse to talk about love.
Love, yeah.
So we took it higher, we took live higher beyond
just romantic love and we focused on what in the
Christian tradition is agape, or the unconditional love.
And we brought individuals and community leaders,
so we had like 15 religious leaders actually from
different faiths, Muslim, Christian, Jewish.
There were Buddhists, there were the kind of new
spirituality groups that were there as well.
Then we had business leaders, we had leaders of
social service agencies, and the general public.
We had about 100 people, and again we did the same format.
We broke down into small groups, and we asked the people
a series of questions, and one of the main questions was
what do you think the main problem facing
American society is?
And the answer really overwhelmingly was lack of unity.
Lack of unity.
So then we then led a brainstorm of
OK, let's list all sorts of things that we could do
to build unity.
So out of this process came 150 ideas,
and one of them became Get to Know Your Neighbor Week.
So that idea emerged from this group process.
It wasn't like we read about it in a book, or you know,
we went on the internet and we found there was some model
and we're just gonna replicate it.
This was working on us.
This process, if you're able to let this group process go
and not try to control it, if you just allow it to emerge,
which is one of the important principles of building
community is to be more like a steward.
Yes.
It's like being loving, you know.
It's like being gentle and humble, as opposed to
I know what's best, and we're gonna do it this way,
'cause then you're just gonna generate animosity,
and the kind of group you're gonna develop is gonna be
ego-based and territorial.
Yeah, more separation.
So we learned through this process,
so that was one example.
Another was we did an annual celebration,
so we had a festival and a sustainable community expo
that we've done for the last two years.
That was another example.
And the third idea that came up was what
we initially called teams.
So the idea was we were gonna build teams of people
to discuss what we have in common about spirituality.
So the way that we've defined the context for spirituality
is to focus on virtues that we share, that are in common to
all the moral and ethical...
systems of all the world's religions,
but also in common to what's happening in the civic
secular society.
And so we identified five categories of virtues,
and about 30 total virtues.
So we identified love, integrity, courage,
service and respect.
And within those are things like forgiveness
and faith and hope and...
Compassion.
Forgiveness and self reliance and restraint
and service and building community,
all those kinds of things were in there.
So this group of people, we had an experiment, if you will,
so it was a group process.
Again, we didn't know anything about it.
We didn't read about it in a book, you know.
We didn't like find it online somewhere.
We didn't like just take some canned program.
We were really wanting to learn what is a way for people
to get together to raise spiritual awareness,
but not in a context of any particular religious system
or spiritual teaching.
So it's not based on going to a workshop or a conference
or listening to a sermon by somebody.
How could people get together and help one another?
So over the last two years we've been building what now
we call the Conscious Community Weavers Group,
and they meet once a month.
And it's a very amazing process, and I have to say
since I've been involved and maybe actively more than
25 years of maybe conscious spiritual practice of
different kinds, I'm just amazed at myself because
I'm constantly, it's a humbling experience, you know,
when you think you know something or you think that
your view is better or something, there's this kind of
spiritual superiority that kind of develops
in any spiritual practice,
whether it's within organized relation or the new
spiritual traditions that are developing,
there's this kind of superiority that develops.
And this, it really levels it because the idea isn't to
talk about beliefs.
The idea is to talk about how we're demonstrating
our highest spiritual principles and ideals.
So people come into the group from different spiritual
and religious backgrounds.
So we have Christians and Jews, and we have people
maybe are spiritual but not religious, so we have a mix.
And it's very simple.
We ask people to share directly from their heart
in simple language how they are overcoming and
transcending the way the ego is dominating our lives
in a way that leads to suffering.
And the way that we do that is people share
virtues that they're demonstrating.
So the virtues are like a handle.
Give us an example of something
that you found fascinating and you learned from.
Well, for myself personally, I mean, it's just so.
I mean, I could tell amazing stories like I'll just
share one or two.
One is I had to admit to myself that I had
unforgiveness for my mother, who's in her 80s.
And I just wasn't aware of it.
She was going to visit Reno from where they live, and...
I made it as an intention in this group.
I said, you know, I'm gonna forgive my mother.
I don't know how I'm gonna do it.
So I didn't really get into my own personal spiritual
practice which has to do with I guess following Jesus.
But I guess I'm not part of an organized religion,
but I look at Jesus more as like an elder brother.
Yes, yes, a guiding force, guiding light.
So I asked for me, I pray to God and I ask Jesus,
help me, please.
So this is part of the process.
Anyway, you know, in my meditation that I learned
from the Tibetans, but also in the prayer that I learned
through Christians that I know, I was able to...
create some openness within myself to create an opportunity
when my mother was visiting here once to
take her on a whole day of adventure, you know.
Take her to lunch and then go hiking in the forest,
and in the build up to that I had time to really
focus on myself.
And by seeing my mother I was able to put it into practice.
Well, I didn't quite accomplish what I wanted to
fully that time, but then I brought it back to the group
to share what I had accomplished.
I said this is what I did.
I was able to apply this principle, I prayed, I meditated,
I practiced, you know, as much as I could understand
forgiveness, and this is the outcome.
And then another month went by 'cause I had that
as an intention to continue this.
So within three months I really believed that I was
able to overcome the unforgiveness I had for my mother,
and it didn't involve her changing at all.
So I changed my perception, and then I was able to
see my mother in a different way and accept her
as she is, and that was, so I see this group as accelerating
that kind of transforming.
And this is really foundational 'cause
this is part of creating a healthy interior world view,
and also relationships with others and family,
'cause this community is made up of families,
and this is really critical, just these very basic
sorts of things that every human being faces
to one degree or another.
You're absolutely right.
We've taken, it's like all the stuff we were talking about,
the economic level, the social level, all these networks,
and we've just distilled it down to the simplest essence,
which is you could summarize I think all of religion
and all of spirituality into love and service to others.
So the love, people have different ideas of
how to get there.
You know, for myself I guess loving God,
or really allowing time to simplify my life so I could
develop my interior life so I can communicate
and have a relationship to God.
So there's something bigger than me that I'm part of,
but doing that creates a kind of an emptying,
it's an emptying process of the self.
So if you fill yourself with all this stuff and distractions
and worries and fears, that's all you can manifest
in this world.
But if you can start emptying the self, then what you allow
is through prayer, in my case, asking Jesus for help,
God's love comes through you if you let it,
and then it manifests as loving service.
It's action.
It's not something you keep to yourself.
It's not something that you're just gonna stay in a,
in your own little cave or something.
Right.
So you start with your family.
You're right, so you start at the basis.
There are so many people that are activists out there
that are trying to change the world and do good,
but on some level it's not complete if you just
ignore the family, and on the one hand go out and preach
peace and love in the world, but you hate your family,
or you ignore them.
Change begins at home.
Well yeah, and you know, this is hard.
I'm not saying this is easy at all,
but I think it's necessary today because we've just taken
this basic I guess insanity within ourselves,
and it's just over, you know, the last couple centuries
it's just magnified now, and it's global insanity.
So the way to take it back is to be very simple
and to start within, and in the family.
And then what we've done in this weaver group is we've
gone beyond just the individual and our families that
we're trying to support.
We have ways of reaching out to our neighbors
and then our whole community by connecting
existing projects.
So this weaver group isn't just for our own self awareness
and spiritual awareness.
It's actually connect the community to create opportunities
for new projects to be created outside of our group.
So we're not trying to organize these ourselves.
We're a catalysts, so we're an ongoing catalytic process.
Well, this is a message that I think
every community needs to address in their own way.
Ultimately we're, as you say, we're now coming down to
paying the piper, and it means we do have to
rely on ourselves.
And the fact that you started this so many years ago,
and you're so far into this process now just when people
are starting to, en masse, starting to wake up and realize,
oh my goodness, all the institutions have failed us.
Now what do we do?
And it sounds like you've already made some really good
headway and can serve as a guide,
if you don't mind other people cutting and pasting
some of what you've done and applying it in
their own communities.
Not to say that one shouldn't have their own creative input
as to how this happens.
But on that note, before we go, a couple of just
salient points you'd like to make, some words of wisdom
as someone else hears this and inspired to take this on
themselves and plant seeds in their own community.
Sure, I'd like to do that.
You know, before I'd say maybe a year or two ago
what we erre doing seemed complex 'cause we had
all these activities.
Now it's extremely simple.
What I would suggest is find, if you've got a friend,
get some friends together and your family,
maybe go to our website and look 'cause we actually have
this group process, it's kind of mapped out there.
And you can look at that as a way to start this process.
There are already millions of small groups that are
gathering because what we're trying to do is not
reinvent the wheel, but we're trying to create,
the group itself purpose is trying to connect the community.
So it's kind of a unique function I think.
So it's not, we're not like creating anything new
for ourselves, like building up your own organization,
so that's not the interest.
You're creating almost conscious awareness
of each other and what you can do to help become part of
and sustain the whole.
I think so, it's like creating like islands of sanity,
and the sanity to me rests in connecting to something
greater than yourselves first,
so for me it's connecting to God.
And then being able to have that work through us
and actually create an island of joy starting with
small groups where we take care of one another.
So part of the group process isn't just like processing.
It's actually practical support.
We build a community where we help each other
with practical stuff like somebody needs to move
on a weekend.
You'll be right there, we're available.
So we're actually building the seeds of a new community.
And I think, so I call it, it's like an intentional
spiritual community without walls.
And there's no ideology.
There's just this intention to support one another
and to live a life based on love and service.
Thank you.
You're welcome.
Please take it upon yourself to contact Richard
if you would like to create conscious community
in your area.
He's a very loving and generous soul,
and will be happy to help you understand
the dynamics of community building.
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN.